# Chapter 1: The Big Picture

> ❓ The biggest question is: **How Linux works?**

The most effective way to understand how an operating system works is through an **abstraction**. We can divide Linux Operating System into 3 layered abstractions:
- User Processes
- Kernel
- Hardware

### Main Memory
Main memory is just a huge storage for numerous 0s and 1s, called bits. This is where all programs, including the kernel itself, are stored. A CPU is just an operator on memory: *it reads instructions from memory, performs computations (using its registers) and writes the result back to the memory.*
**State.** A state is a particular arrangement of 0s and 1s at specific time. This means, 0110, 0010 and 0001 are different states even if they are in the same time frames. A process is also a state consisting millions of bits. So, it is very hard to memorize what state it is and was, so we again make it abstract:
❌ The process is in state `0110 0001 0011 1101 1111`
✅ The process is **waiting for input**.

### Kernel
The kernel has a number of definitions. Here's 2 of them:
- Kernel is an interface between hardware and processes.
- Kernel is a software that tells CPU where to look for the next task.

Kernel has a number of responsibilities:
- **Process scheduling:** Which process is allowed to use CPU at any given time.
- **Memory Management:** which memory is of which process, which memory is shared, which are being allocated and freed, etc.
- **Device drivers:** Managing specific hardware interfaces.
- **System call support:** User processes can call kernel functions using syscalls.

👉 [General OS Concepts start here](../../GeneralOSConcepts/README.md)

### User Space
User space is a memory area allocated by Kernel for user processes. Recall that a process is simply a state of memory.

# User Entity
Linux supports User management. But why it needs a user? Users exists primarily to support **permissions** and **boundaries**. Every user-space process has *owner*, and any user can only access and modify the process owned by them. 
**Root user** has unrestricted access however. Root user can easily modify any process, no matter who owns that. System designers always try root access as less required as possible. For instance, what if simply turning on Wi-Fi would require root access (as it is a hardware feature). That would be a security hole!

