# Chapter 2: Basic Commands and Directory Hierarchy

### Standard Input and Standard Output
Unix processes use I/O streams to read and write data. Streams are very flexible: a source of an input stream can be a file, a device, a terminal window or even the output stream of the another process. To observe this, simply type `cat` and press ENTER. The program starts to wait for your input from input stream to do its work, as you didn't specify from which file it should read. So, in this case Terminal's output stream is being cat's input stream.

### Basic Commands
- `cat /etc/passwd`
- `cat file1.conf file2.txt`
- `ls -l`
- `cp file1.txt file2.txt` - file1 is copied into file2
- `cp file dir` - file is copied into dir
- `cp file1 file2 file3 dir` - multiple files are copied into dir
- `mv file1 file2` - renames file1 as file2
- `touch file` - creates a file
- `ls -l file` - shows file information with permissions
- `rm file` - removes the file
- `wc file` - counts lines, words, and bytes (`-l -m -c` flags respectively)

### Navigating Directories
- `cd dir` - changes current directory to dir (opens dir)
- `mkdir dir` - makes a new dir
- `rmdir dir` - removes the dir

### Shell Globbing (Wildcards)
Shell can match simple patterns to file and directory names. 
- `echo *` - any number of arbitrary characters (lists files in a current directory)
- `("msg*", "*msg", "*msg*")` - [0] expands to all filenames that start with msg, [1] expands to all filenames end with msg, [3] expands to all filenames contain msg
- `br?t` - ? glob expands to exactly 1 character - matching `brat` and `brot` in this example

### Intermediate Commands
- `grep root /etc/passwd` - prints the lines from a file or input stream that match an expression. Here, it prints lines in `/etc/passwd` file that contain text root
    -> `grep -i` - matches case-insensitive
    -> `grep -v` - inverts the search (lists not matching)
    -> grep understands regex: 
	- `grep root /etc/.*` - matches any number of chars, including none.
    	- `grep root /etc/.+` - matches any one or more chars.
	- `grep root /etc/.` - matches exactly one arbitrary char.
- `less file` - opens file with scroll option. Handy if a file or output stream is too big. For example, `grep ie /usr/share/dict/words | less` is giving all of the words containing `ie` as input stream to less, and it shows the result with scrolling option.
- `pwd` - print working directory
- `diff file1 file2` - see differences between 2 text files
- `file file` - let system guess the type of file
- `find dir -name file -print` - finds a file in directory dir and prints the location
- `head file.txt` - shows first 10 lines of the file. Use `-n` option to specify size
- `tail file.txt` - shows last 10 lines of the file. Use `-n` option to specify size
- `sort file` - sorts the file in alphanumeric order. `-r` for reverse, `-n` for sorting by numerical order only.


## User Management
In Unix-based systems you can create a new user as follows:
```bash
sudo useradd <user>     # adds user without /home/<user> directory
sudo useradd -m <user>  # adds user with /home/<user> directory
```
To change password of the user:
```bash
passwd <user>
```

To add a new group to the system:
```bash
sudo groupadd <group>
```
To add a user to the group:
```bash
sudo usermod -aG <group> <user>
```
To login as a new user:
```bash
su - <user>
# enter password
```

### Environment and Shell Variables
The shell can store temporary variables, called **shell variables**. For example:
```bash
$ STUFF=ls
$ $STUFF
# ... (ls)
```

An **environment variable** is a bit different. All processes on Unix systems have envvar storage. The primary difference is, evironment variables are accessible from any program ran by that shell (process), whereas shell variables can't be used with processes ran by that shell.
To assign an envvar:
```bash
STUFF=something
export STUFF
```

### The Command Path
PATH is a special envvar that contains a list of system dirs that shell searches when we type. For example, if we write `ls` on terminal, it searches the following dirs by default to find `ls` program:
```bash
ubuntu@ubuntu2404server:/etc$ echo $PATH
/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin
```
We also can tell the shell to look for other directories:
```bash
$ PATH=dir:$PATH
# or to append a dir
$ PATH=$PATH:dir
```

> ❓ Even if you wipe out your PATH accidentally, this change is local. Because envvars are stored locally in each process' address space, simply exiting the shell and opening a new one solves the problem.

### Input and Output
There are 3 types of streams in Unix: standard input, standard output and standard error. We can redirect the streams as we defined. For example:
```bash
command > file
command >> file
```
The former will redirect the output of `command` to file, strictly writing the file. The latter will also redirect, but appending to the existing contents of the file.

To send the standard output of a command to the standard input of another command, use the pipe character (|). The following example redirects the result of processes list to tail, showing only last 10 entries of the list:
```bash
ps -ax | tail
```
We may redirect the standard error into different location:
```bash
ls -a 2> error.txt
```

### Manipulating Processes
The `ps` command we emphasized earlier have several options to execute:
```bash
ps x   # show all of your running processes
ps ax  # show all processes not just yours
ps u   # include more detailed information about processes
ps w   # show full command names
```

### Job Control
More later...


## File Modes and Permissions
One of the most suffered topics for me. I just couldn't understand octal, hex notations of the permissions, based on user, group and other. Now, its time to reveal whats inside. Let's run ls -l:
```bash
ls -l

# drwxr-xr-x. 1 voidp voidp  74 May  6 01:34 samandar
# -rw-r--r--. 1 voidp voidp    201 Apr 22 19:11  exam.txt
```
The permissions column structured in this way:
`[file_type][user_permissions x3][group_permissions x3][other_permissions x3]` for example `-rwxrw-r--` means this is a regular file, the user can read, write, and execute, the group can read and execute, and other can read.
`drwxr-xr-x` means this is a directory, the user can read, write, and execute, the group can read and execute, and other can read.

**Modifying Permissions.**  
To change permissions on a file or directory, use the `chmod` command. We can change permissions for user, group and other:
```bash
chmod u+w file  # add write permission for user
chmod g+x file  # add execute permission for group
chmod o+r file  # add read permission for other
```

We can also change file permissions using numbers, in octal form. This might seem strange, and no need to remember every single one, but here are some examples:
```bash
chmod 744 file  # rwxr-xr-x
chmod 777 file  # rwxrwxrwx
chmod 644 file  # rw-r--r--
chmod 555 file  # rwxr-xr-x
chmod 755 file  # rwxr-xr-x
chmod 700 file  # rwx------
chmod 600 file  # rw-------
chmod 400 file  # r--------
chmod 200 file  # -w-------
chmod 100 file  # --x------
chmod 000 file  # ---------
```

**Symbolic Links.**  
A symbolic link is a file that points to another file or a directory, effectively creating an alias:
```bash
lrwxrwxrwx 1 ruser users 11 Feb 27 13:52 somedir -> /home/origdir
```
To create a symbolic link from target to linkname, use ln -s as follows:
```bash
ln -s target linkname
# For example:
ln -s /home/Desktop/Projects /home/Projects
```
> ⚠️ I need further explanation of this, couldn't get so much.


## Archiving and Compressing Files
When it comes to compressing files in Unix, GNU Zip or `gzip` comes to mind firstly:
```bash
gzip file         # compress file
gunzip file.gz    # decompress file
```
However, unlike ZIP programs in other operating systems, `gzip` does not pack multiple files into single compress, namely does not archive them. To do so, we use `tar`:
```bash
tar cvf archive.tar file1 file2 file3
# c - create mode, v - verbose diagnostic output, f - file option (.tar file name)
tar xvf archive.tar
# x - extract, v - verbose diagnostic output
```
**Using Table-of-Contents Mode**  
Before unpacking, it’s usually a good idea to check the contents of a `.tar` file with the table-of-contents mode by using the `t` flag instead of the `x` flag. This mode verifies the archive’s basic integrity and prints the names of all files inside. If you don’t test an archive before unpacking it, you can end up dumping a huge mess of files into the current directory, which can be really difficult to clean up.
```bash
tar tvf archive.tar
```
**Compressed Archives.**  
Compressed archives are just archives with a `.gz` extension:
```bash
tar zcvf archive.tar.gz file1 file2 file3
# z - gzip compression, c - create mode, v - verbose diagnostic output, f - file option (.tar file name)
tar zxvf archive.tar.gz
# z - gzip compression, x - extract, v - verbose diagnostic output

# or 2 separate commands:
gunzip archive.tar.gz
tar xvf archive.tar
```

---
> I just skipped the last subchapter: Linux Directory Hierarchy, and sudoers file config, as we don't necessarily need to write them out here.

Now, let's start solving some exercises regarding the concepts we learnt till now.